---
title: "Probabilistic Inversion Modeling of Gas Emissions: A Gradient-Based MCMC Estimation of Gaussian Plume Parameters"
date: 2025-09-30
lastmod: 2026-02-16
tags: ["Markov chain Monte Carlo","gas emmissions","Gaussian plume model", "inverse modelling"]
author: ["Thomas Newman", "Christopher Nemeth", "Matthew Jones", "Philip Jonathan"]
description: " "
summary: "Annals of Applied Statistics"
editPost:
    URL: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.01298"
    Text: "Annals of Applied Statistics"

---

---


##### Download

+ [Paper](https://projecteuclid.org/journals/annals-of-applied-statistics/volume-19/issue-4/Probabilistic-inversion-modeling-of-gas-emissions--A-gradient-based/10.1214/25-AOAS2101.short)
+ [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.01298)
+ [Code](https://github.com/NewmanTHP/Probabilistic-Inversion-Modeling-of-Gas-Emissions)



---
##### Abstract

In response to global concerns regarding air quality and the environmental impact of greenhouse gas emissions, detecting and quantifying sources of emissions has become critical. To understand this impact and target mitigations effectively, methods for accurate quantification of greenhouse gas emissions are required. In this paper, we focus on the inversion of concentration measurements to estimate source location and emission rate. In practice, such methods often rely on atmospheric stability class-based Gaussian plume dispersion models. However, incorrectly identifying the atmospheric stability class can lead to significant bias in estimates of source characteristics. We present a robust approach that reduces this bias by jointly estimating the horizontal and vertical dispersion parameters of the Gaussian plume model, together with source location and emission rate, atmospheric background concentration, and sensor measurement error variance. Uncertainty in parameter estimation is quantified through probabilistic inversion using gradient-based MCMC methods. A simulation study is performed to assess the inversion methodology. We then focus on inference for the published Chilbolton dataset which contains controlled methane releases and demonstrates the practical benefits of estimating dispersion parameters in source inversion problems.

---
##### Citation

Newman, T., Nemeth, C., Jones, M., & Jonathan, P. (2025). Probabilistic Inversion Modeling of Gas Emissions: A Gradient-Based MCMC Estimation of Gaussian Plume Parameters. *Annals of Applied Statistics*. Vol. 19(4), pp. 2937-2956. 

```BibTeX
@article{newman2024probabilistic,
  title={Probabilistic Inversion Modeling of Gas Emissions: A Gradient-Based MCMC Estimation of Gaussian Plume Parameters},
  author={Newman, Thomas and Nemeth, Christopher and Jones, Matthew and Jonathan, Philip},
  journal={Annals of Applied Statistics},
  volume = {19},
  number = {4},
  pages = {2937-2956},
  year={2025}
}
```



